Add "Teach Promptless a custom task" how-to guide (#781)
Promptless/docs: src/content/docs/docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task.mdx

Reviewer: Adding a hook in the PROMPTLESS.md is *really* important. PROMPTLESS.md gets loaded into the system prompt, but other KB files are only loaded when searched out. A user wants a custom workflow to activate consistently, they NEED to add an "If, then" hook referencing the specific workflow in PROMPTLESS.md.

Reviewer: These custom workflows are effectively Agent Skills and can be formatted that way, either in the KB or in a doc colleciton. If the workflow is defined as an agent skill in a doc collection, the hook in PROMPTLESS.md should state which doc collection the skill is in, such as "When a contributor PR is opened in acme/docs, use the `contributor-workflow` skill from the Acme doc collection."

---
title: Teach Promptless a custom task
description: Give Promptless a new or customized workflow by pairing a trigger with written instructions — the general process, plus a complete example
slug: docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task
type: guide
tags:
  - get-the-most-out
  - guide
timestamp: "2026-07-22T00:00:00Z"
sidebar:
  hidden: false
  order: 34
  label: Teach a custom task
---

import { Aside, LinkCard } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

Promptless ships with default behaviors, like reviewing code PRs for documentation impact, but you can teach it new or customized tasks on top of those defaults. A custom task pairs two ingredients: a **trigger** that decides when Promptless runs, and a **workflow written as instructions** that describes what it does. This page covers the general process, including prerequisites, the workflow, the trigger, and how a run unfolds. A complete example lives on its own page: [Example: review inbound documentation PRs](/docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task/review-inbound-doc-prs).

## The two ingredients of a custom task

Every custom task combines two pieces:

> - **A trigger** determines when Promptless runs — you configure it in the `triggers` section of the [Configuration page](https://app.gopromptless.ai/configuration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **A trigger** determines when Promptless runs — you configure it in the **Triggers** section of the [Configuration page](https://app.gopromptless.ai/configuration).
```

Good workflow instructions are concrete. Spell out what to check, what to prioritize, and what output to produce, so the agent knows exactly what a successful run looks like.

## Configure the trigger

The trigger is the *when*. You manage triggers in the dashboard: in the left sidebar, select **Configuration**, open the **Triggers** tab, and choose **Add a trigger**. The Configuration page has a **Form / YAML** view toggle — the **Form** view is the default UI path for building a trigger, and the **YAML** view shows the underlying `promptless.yaml`. Saving on the Configuration page commits the change to `promptless.yaml` in your Agent Knowledge Base. You can also ask Promptless to make these trigger changes for you.

The trigger you create looks like this in YAML:

```yaml
triggers:
  my-pr-trigger:
    trigger_type: github_pr
    match:
      - repos:
          - acme/docs
        trigger_on:
          - opened           # When PR opens (default)
          - first_approval   # After first approval
          - merge            # When PR merges
        trigger_directories:
          - docs/

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trigger is the *when*. You manage triggers in the dashboard: in the left sidebar, select **Configuration**, open the **Triggers** tab, and choose **Add a trigger**.  You might set up a GitHub PR trigger that activates when a PR is opened or a Slack trigger that listens for messages in a channel and acts when it finds particular criteria you specify.
```

> For the full set of options, see [GitHub PRs](/docs/connect/triggers/github-prs) and the [Configuration Reference](/docs/reference/configuration-reference#triggers).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

<Aside type="caution">

>   The GitHub triggers support `opened`, `first_approval`, and `merge` events. If you want additional reviews at other times in the PR lifecycle, such as when new commits are pushed, request it manually via an `@promptless` mention in a PR comment (see [GitHub PRs](/docs/connect/triggers/github-prs)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The GitHub PR triggers support *Opened*, *First approval*, and *Merged* events. If you want additional reviews at other times in the PR lifecycle, such as when new commits are pushed, request it manually via an `@Promptless` mention in a PR comment (see [GitHub PRs](/docs/connect/triggers/github-prs)).
```

</Aside>

Custom tasks built this way are event-driven: a trigger fires on new events (like a PR opening) and does not retroactively scan or audit your existing pages. For one-time, corpus-wide work such as audits, retrofits, or writing from scratch, use [Pay down docs debt with Deep Analysis](/docs/get-the-most-out/pay-down-docs-debt).

## How a run unfolds

Once the workflow and trigger are in place, a custom task runs the same way every time:

1. The trigger fires on a qualifying event (like a pull request being opened).
2. Promptless reads the relevant context for that event.
3. It follows your written workflow step by step.
4. It produces the output your instructions define.

The specifics — what context is read and what output lands — depend entirely on the workflow you define.

> The **review inbound documentation PRs** example demonstrates the full process end to end: a written review workflow paired with a GitHub PR trigger. It shows the concrete prerequisites, workflow instructions, trigger YAML, and `PROMPTLESS.md` updates for one real task, and it spells out exactly what Promptless can deliver today.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **review inbound documentation PRs** example demonstrates the full process end to end as a written review workflow paired with a GitHub PR trigger. It shows the concrete prerequisites, workflow instructions, trigger YAML, and `PROMPTLESS.md` updates for one real task.
```

---
title: Teach Promptless a custom task
description: Give Promptless a new or customized workflow by pairing a trigger with written instructions — the general process, plus a complete worked example
slug: docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task
type: guide
tags:
  - get-the-most-out
  - guide
timestamp: "2026-07-22T00:00:00Z"
sidebar:
  hidden: false
  order: 34
  label: Teach a custom task
---

import { Aside, LinkCard } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

> Promptless ships with default behaviors, like reviewing code PRs for documentation impact, and you can teach it new or customized tasks on top of those defaults. A custom task pairs two ingredients: a **trigger** that decides when Promptless runs, and a **workflow written as instructions** that describes what it does. This page covers the general process — prerequisites, the workflow, the trigger, and how a run unfolds. A complete worked example lives on its own page: [Example: review inbound documentation PRs](/docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task/review-inbound-doc-prs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Promptless ships with default behaviors, like reviewing code PRs for documentation impact, but you can teach it new or customized tasks on top of those defaults. A custom task pairs two ingredients: a **trigger** that decides when Promptless runs, and a **workflow written as instructions** that describes what it does. This page covers the general process, including prerequisites, the workflow, the trigger, and how a run unfolds. A complete example lives on its own page: [Example: review inbound documentation PRs](/docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task/review-inbound-doc-prs).
```

sidebar:
  hidden: false
  order: 34
  label: Teach a custom task
---

import { Aside, LinkCard } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

Promptless ships with default behaviors, like reviewing code PRs for documentation impact, but you can teach it new or customized tasks on top of those defaults. A custom task pairs two ingredients: a **trigger** that decides when Promptless runs, and a **workflow written as instructions** that describes what it does. This page covers the general process, including prerequisites, the workflow, the trigger, and how a run unfolds. A complete example lives on its own page: [Example: review inbound documentation PRs](/docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task/review-inbound-doc-prs).

## The two ingredients of a custom task

Every custom task combines two pieces:

- **A trigger** determines when Promptless runs — you configure it in the `triggers` section of the [Configuration page](https://app.gopromptless.ai/configuration).
- **A written workflow** is the set of instructions the agent follows when that trigger fires — it lives in `PROMPTLESS.md` in your Knowledge Base and/or as a custom Agent Skill in your docs repo.

> The agent follows written instructions well, so the guidance you provide can redirect or augment its built-in default behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Promptless follows written instructions well, so the guidance you provide can redirect or augment its built-in default behavior.
```

> This trigger-plus-instructions pattern is general: you pair written instructions with [any supported trigger type](/docs/reference/configuration-reference#trigger-types), not just `github_pr`, so the same mechanism drives many different custom tasks. The worked example at the end of this page shows one end-to-end illustration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This trigger-plus-instructions pattern is general: you pair written instructions with [any supported trigger type](/docs/reference/configuration-reference#trigger-types), not just `github_pr`, so the same mechanism drives many different custom tasks. The example at the end of this page shows an end-to-end illustration.
```

> This trigger-plus-instructions pattern is general: you pair written instructions with [any supported trigger type](/docs/reference/configuration-reference#trigger-types), not just `github_pr`, so the same mechanism drives many different custom tasks. The example at the end of this page shows an end-to-end illustration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This trigger-plus-instructions pattern is general: you pair written instructions with [any supported trigger type](/docs/reference/configuration-reference#trigger-types) so the same mechanism drives many different custom tasks. There is an example at the end of this page to illustrate.
```

<Aside type="note">
  This page builds on [How Promptless learns your docs](/docs/connect/doc-locations/how-promptless-learns-your-docs), which covers where Promptless reads custom guidance — `AGENTS.md`/`CLAUDE.md` in your docs repo, Agent Skills under `.claude/skills/`, `.agents/skills/`, or `.cursor/skills/`, and `PROMPTLESS.md`.
</Aside>

## Prerequisites

Before you build a custom task, make sure you have:

> - **The relevant integration or trigger source connected** — for example, the GitHub integration for a `github_pr` task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **The relevant integration or trigger source connected.** For example, the GitHub integration for a `github_pr` task.
```

> - **A Knowledge Base** where your `PROMPTLESS.md` and/or a custom Agent Skill live.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - **Org-admin access** to edit `PROMPTLESS.md` and `promptless.yaml` — or the ability to ask Promptless to make those edits for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **The ability to chat with Promptless** in Slack or Teams to make edits for you, or **admin access** to edit the Knowledge Base directly.
```

> Concrete, per-task prerequisites live on each worked example's page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The workflow is the *what*: the concrete instructions the agent follows once a trigger fires. Give the workflow a home and pair it with a hook. The workflow *body* lives in one of two places, and `PROMPTLESS.md` holds only an "If, then" *hook* that points to it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow is the *what*: the concrete instructions the agent follows once a trigger fires. Give the workflow a home and pair it with an "If, then" hook in `PROMPTLESS.md`. The workflow can live in one of two places:
```

> - **As a markdown file under `doc_workflows/` in your Knowledge Base.** Write the instructions as their own file (for example, `doc_workflows/review-inbound-doc-prs.md`) and add a hook in `PROMPTLESS.md` that points to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **As a markdown file under `doc_workflows/` in your Knowledge Base.** Write the instructions as their own file (for example, `doc_workflows/review-inbound-doc-prs.md`).
```

> The workflow is the *what*: the concrete instructions the agent follows once a trigger fires. Instructions live in `PROMPTLESS.md`, and/or as a custom Agent Skill in your docs repo. To learn what `PROMPTLESS.md` is and where skills live, see [How Promptless learns your docs](/docs/connect/doc-locations/how-promptless-learns-your-docs); to view and edit Knowledge Base files, open the [Agent Knowledge Base](/docs/get-the-most-out/agent-knowledge-base).

Reviewer: The workflows can but shouldn't live in PROMPTLESS.md directly. They should either live in a markdown file in doc_workflows/ with a hook in PROMPTLESS.md or live as an Agent Skill in a doc collection with a hook in PROMPTLESS.md.

> - **As an Agent Skill in a doc collection** (your docs repo, under `.claude/skills/`, `.agents/skills/`, or `.cursor/skills/`). Add a hook in `PROMPTLESS.md`, and because the skill lives in a doc collection, the hook must name *which* doc collection — for example, "When a contributor PR is opened in `acme/docs`, use the `contributor-workflow` skill from the Acme doc collection."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **As an Agent Skill in a doc collection** (your docs repo, under `.claude/skills/`, `.agents/skills/`, or `.cursor/skills/`).
- 

Add the hook in `PROMPTLESS.md`, and if the skill lives in a doc collection, the hook should name *which* doc collection. For example, "When a contributor PR is opened in `acme/docs`, use the `contributor-workflow` skill from the Acme doc collection."
```

There are two ways to update these instructions:

1. An organization admin edits `PROMPTLESS.md` in the Agent Knowledge Base (in the left sidebar, open **Configure** and select **Agent Knowledge Base**).

> 2. You can ask Promptless to make these changes for you — for example, by requesting the update the next time you're working with Promptless — and it edits `PROMPTLESS.md` (or the custom skill) and commits the change.

Reviewer: These are unordered parallel items. You should be using an unordered list, not an ordered one.

```suggestion
- An organization admin edits `PROMPTLESS.md` in the Agent Knowledge Base (in the left sidebar, open **Configure** and select **Agent Knowledge Base**).
- You can ask Promptless to make these changes for you — for example, by requesting the update the next time you're working with Promptless — and it edits `PROMPTLESS.md` (or the custom skill) and commits the change.
```

> Keep the workflow body out of `PROMPTLESS.md` itself; reserve `PROMPTLESS.md` for the hook. Hooks in `PROMPTLESS.md` apply to workflows defined anywhere in your Knowledge Base — a `doc_workflows/` file as well as a Skill in a doc collection. To view and edit Knowledge Base files, open the [Agent Knowledge Base](/docs/get-the-most-out/agent-knowledge-base).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Aside type="caution">
  For a custom workflow to activate reliably, have an explicit "If, then" hook in `PROMPTLESS.md` — of the form "If \[condition], then \[do this]." `PROMPTLESS.md` is loaded into the agent's instructions on every run, so a hook there is always visible to the agent, whereas workflows and Agent Skills are only loaded on demand. A workflow that lives only in a separate workflow or Skill may not fire consistently unless a hook in `PROMPTLESS.md` points to it. See [How Promptless learns your docs](/docs/connect/doc-locations/how-promptless-learns-your-docs) for how these files are loaded.
</Aside>
```

> There are two ways to update these instructions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways to add or update these instructions:
```

Good workflow instructions are concrete. Spell out what to check, what to prioritize, and what output to produce, so the agent knows exactly what a successful run looks like.

> These custom workflows are effectively Agent Skills, and you can format them that way. Keep the workflow either in `PROMPTLESS.md` in your Knowledge Base, or as an Agent Skill in a doc collection (your docs repo, under `.claude/skills/`, `.agents/skills/`, or `.cursor/skills/`). One rule matters here: if the workflow is defined as an Agent Skill that lives in a doc collection, the `PROMPTLESS.md` hook (see the requirement below) must name *which* doc collection the skill lives in — for example, "When a contributor PR is opened in `acme/docs`, use the `contributor-workflow` skill from the Acme doc collection."

Reviewer: Hooks in PROMPTLESS.md are also applicable to workflows that are defined elsewhere in the Knowledge Base.

<Aside type="caution">
  For a custom workflow to activate reliably, have an explicit "If, then" hook in `PROMPTLESS.md` — of the form "If \[condition], then \[do this]." `PROMPTLESS.md` is loaded into the agent's instructions on every run, so a hook there is always in front of the agent, whereas workflows and Agent Skills are only loaded on demand — when a task matches a skill's description. A workflow that lives only in a separate workflow or Skill may not fire consistently unless a hook in `PROMPTLESS.md` points to it. See [How Promptless learns your docs](/docs/connect/doc-locations/how-promptless-learns-your-docs) for how these files are loaded.

> </Aside>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>   For a custom workflow to activate reliably, you *must* have an explicit "If, then" hook in `PROMPTLESS.md` — of the form "If \[condition], then \[do this]." This is a requirement, not a suggestion. If the workflow is written inline in `PROMPTLESS.md`, the condition line together with the instructions beneath it is that hook — the instructions are the "then," so there is nothing separate to name. If the workflow instead lives in an Agent Skill that loads on demand, the `PROMPTLESS.md` hook must name the specific skill/workflow so it points to it. `PROMPTLESS.md` is loaded into the agent's instructions on every run, so a hook there is always in front of the agent, whereas Agent Skills are only loaded on demand — when a task matches a skill's description. A workflow that lives only in a Skill may not fire consistently unless a hook in `PROMPTLESS.md` points to it. See [How Promptless learns your docs](/docs/connect/doc-locations/how-promptless-learns-your-docs) for how these files are loaded.

Reviewer: This is the kind of description that we need, but even this needs some refinement.

```suggestion
  For a custom workflow to activate reliably, have an explicit "If, then" hook in `PROMPTLESS.md` — of the form "If \[condition], then \[do this]." `PROMPTLESS.md` is loaded into the agent's instructions on every run, so a hook there is always in front of the agent, whereas workflows and Agent Skills are only loaded on demand — when a task matches a skill's description. A workflow that lives only in a separate workflow or Skill may not fire consistently unless a hook in `PROMPTLESS.md` points to it. See [How Promptless learns your docs](/docs/connect/doc-locations/how-promptless-learns-your-docs) for how these files are loaded.
```

## Configure the trigger

The trigger is the *when*. You manage triggers on the [Configuration page](https://app.gopromptless.ai/configuration) in the `triggers` section, which is backed by a single `promptless.yaml` file in your Agent Knowledge Base, and saving commits the change there. You can also ask Promptless to make these trigger changes for you — Promptless edits `promptless.yaml` and commits the change. When editing manually, only organization admins can edit and save `promptless.yaml` — every member can view it read-only.

As an illustration, here is the shape of a `github_pr` trigger:

```yaml
triggers:
  my-pr-trigger:
    trigger_type: github_pr
    match:
      - repos:
          - acme/docs
        trigger_on:
          - opened           # When PR opens (default)
          - first_approval   # After first approval
          - merge            # When PR merges
        trigger_directories:
          - docs/

> ```

Reviewer: BY DEFAULT, WE SHOULD BE REFERRING TO THE UI, NOT THE PROMPTLESS.YAML CONFIG. REMEMBER THIS.

For the full set of options, see [GitHub PRs](/docs/connect/triggers/github-prs) and the [Configuration Reference](/docs/reference/configuration-reference#triggers).

<Aside type="caution">

>   The `github_pr` trigger supports exactly three events — `opened`, `first_approval`, and `merge` — only. There is no "updated"/synchronize/re-review-on-push event today, so you can't configure automatic re-review when new commits are pushed. To re-review after new commits, request it manually via an `@promptless` mention in a PR comment (see [GitHub PRs](/docs/connect/triggers/github-prs)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The GitHub triggers support `opened`, `first_approval`, and `merge` events. If you want additional reviews at other times in the PR lifecycle, such as when new commits are pushed, request it manually via an `@promptless` mention in a PR comment (see [GitHub PRs](/docs/connect/triggers/github-prs)).
```

</Aside>

<Aside type="note">
  Custom tasks built this way are event-driven: a trigger fires on new events (like a PR opening) and does not retroactively scan or audit your existing pages. For one-time, corpus-wide work such as audits, retrofits, or writing from scratch, use [Pay down docs debt with Deep Analysis](/docs/get-the-most-out/pay-down-docs-debt).

> </Aside>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom tasks built this way are event-driven: a trigger fires on new events (like a PR opening) and does not retroactively scan or audit your existing pages. For one-time, corpus-wide work such as audits, retrofits, or writing from scratch, use [Pay down docs debt with Deep Analysis](/docs/get-the-most-out/pay-down-docs-debt).
```

## How a run unfolds

Once the workflow and trigger are in place, a custom task runs the same way every time:

> 1. The trigger fires on a qualifying event (for a `github_pr` task, a matching pull request).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The trigger fires on a qualifying event (like a pull request being opened).
```

2. Promptless reads the relevant context for that event.
3. It follows your written workflow step by step.
4. It produces the output your instructions define.

> The specifics — what context is read and what output lands — depend on the task; see the example for the concrete details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The specifics — what context is read and what output lands — depend entirely on the workflow you define. 
```

<Aside type="note">
  Your instructions can describe steps that go beyond what Promptless can currently execute for a given trigger. Promptless does the parts it supports today and treats the rest as intended design. The example's "What's available today" section spells out the current limits for that task, so check it for specifics.

> </Aside>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## A complete example

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## A complete worked example

Reviewer: "worked example" is a no-go. Add a vale rule to catch this.

> The **review inbound documentation PRs** example demonstrates the full process end to end: a written review workflow paired with a `github_pr` trigger. It shows the concrete prerequisites, workflow instructions, trigger YAML, and `PROMPTLESS.md` updates for one real task, and it spells out exactly what Promptless delivers today.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **review inbound documentation PRs** example demonstrates the full process end to end: a written review workflow paired with a GitHub PR trigger. It shows the concrete prerequisites, workflow instructions, trigger YAML, and `PROMPTLESS.md` updates for one real task, and it spells out exactly what Promptless can deliver today.
```

> <LinkCard title="Example: review inbound documentation PRs" href="/docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task/review-inbound-doc-prs" description="An end-to-end `github_pr` task: the prerequisites, workflow instructions, trigger YAML, and PROMPTLESS.md updates end to end." />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<LinkCard title="Example: review inbound documentation PRs" href="/docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task/review-inbound-doc-prs" description="An end-to-end GitHub PR custom workflow." />
```

> Need help? Contact us at [help@gopromptless.ai](mailto\:help@gopromptless.ai).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
title: Teach Promptless a custom task
description: Give Promptless a new or customized workflow by pairing a trigger with written instructions — the general process, plus a complete example
slug: docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task
type: guide
tags:
  - get-the-most-out
  - guide
timestamp: "2026-07-22T00:00:00Z"
sidebar:
  hidden: false
  order: 34
  label: Teach a custom task
---

import { Aside, LinkCard } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

> Promptless ships with default behaviors, like reviewing code PRs for documentation impact, but you can teach it new or customized tasks on top of those defaults. A custom task pairs two ingredients: a **trigger** that decides when Promptless runs, and a **workflow written as instructions** that describes what it does. This page covers the general process, including prerequisites, the workflow, the trigger, and how a run unfolds. A complete example lives on its own page: [Example: review inbound documentation PRs](/docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task/review-inbound-doc-prs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Promptless ships with default behaviors, like reviewing code PRs for documentation impact, but you can teach it new or customized tasks on top of those defaults. A custom task pairs two ingredients: a **trigger** that decides when Promptless runs, and a **workflow written as instructions** that describes what it does. This page covers the general process, including prerequisites, the workflow, the trigger, and how a run unfolds.
```
